---
layout: post
title: "Implement user authentication and authorization"
date: 2025-03-17
---

**Learning path link: [AZ-204: Implement user authentication and authorization](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/training/paths/az-204-implement-authentication-authorization/)**

*Methodology: For each learning objective in each module, write a short summary demonstrating knowledge matching the objective as learned in the course.*

## Post-course review
*Completed after course notes*

*Course notes by module start below*

<hr/>

## Module 1: Explore the Microsoft identity platform

#### Learning Objectives

- Identify the components of the Microsoft identity platform
- Describe the three types of service principals and how they relate to application objects
- Explain how permissions and user consent operate, and how conditional access impacts your application

### Components of identity platform
Platform allows building of apps customers can sign into using msft identities or social accounts and provide authorized access to APIs

Components:
- OAuth 2.0 & OpenID Connect allow auth of several types:
    - Work/school accounts, with Entra ID
    - Personal Microsoft accounts (Skype, Xbox, Outlook)
    - Social or local accounts (Azure AD B2C)
    - Socal or local accounts with Microsoft Entra External ID
- Open-source libraries: Microsoft Authentication Libraries (MSAL)
- Microsoft identity platform endpoint: MSAL or other compliant libs
- App management portal: Registration and configuration experience in Azure portal
- Applicaiton config API and PowerShell: Programatic configuration of apps via Graph API and PowerShell to automate DevOps tasks

> For developers, the Microsoft identity platform offers integration of modern innovations in the identity and security space like passwordless authentication, step-up authentication, and Conditional Access.

Apps using the Microsoft Identity platform natively use these innovations.

### Three types of service principals and relation to app objects
To delegate Identity and Access Management to Entra, app must be registered in the Entra tenant. When you register and app you choose weather it is single or multi tenant. When you register an app, you get a GUID for it, then you can add secrets or certs and scopes to make it work as well as customize branding and sign-in dialog.

**Application Object**

An Entra app is scoped to its one and only applicaiton object. The app object resides in the tenant where the app was registered, the home tenant. The object is used as a tempate or blueprint to create 1+ service principal objects, which are created in every tenant where the app is used.

> Similar to a class in object-oriented programming, the application object has some static properties that are applied to all the created service principals (or application instances).

The app object describes three aspects of an applicaiton:
- How the service can issue tokens in order to access the app
- Resources that the app might need to access
- Actions the app can take

**Service Principal Object**
Accessing resources secured by an Entra tenant, the entity requesting access must be represented by a *security principal*. This is true for both users (user principal) and applications (service principal).

Security principal defines the access policy and permissions for the user/app in the tenant, which enables features like auth of the user/app during sign-in and auth during resource access.

Types of Service Principal:

- Application: Local representation or app instance of a global *application object* in a single tenant. Created in each tenant where an app is used, and references globally unique app object. Defines what app can do in tenant, who can access and what resources the app can access.

- Managed identity: Used to represent a managed identity, which provide identity for apps to use when connecting to resources that support Entra auth. When enabled, a service principal representing the managed identity is created in the tenant and can be granted access and permissions. 

- Legacy: Represents legacy app that was created before app registrations. Can have credentials, SP names, reply URLs and some other properties but doesnt have app registration. 

**Relationship between the two**
- App object is GLOBAL representation of app
- Service principal is LOCAL representation of app in the tenant
- App object serves as a template from which service principal properties are derived. 
- App object has a *one-to-one* relationship with software app AND a *one-to-many* relationship with service principals



### Permissions, user consent and condtional access

> Applications that integrate with the Microsoft identity platform follow an authorization model that gives users and administrators control over how data can be accessed.

- Implements OAuth 2.0 authorization protocol
- OAuth 2.0 is a method through which a third-party app can access web-hosted resources on behalf of a user
- Web-hosted resources that integrate with MSFT identity platform get a resource identifier (application ID URI)
- Exmaples: MSFT Graph, MSFT 365 Mail API, Azure Key Vault
- Resources can define a set of permissions that can be used to divide functionality of the resource into smaller chunks
- Such permissions are called scopes or just permissions, represented as a string value specified in scope QSP on request
- Has well defined OpenID Connect scopes and resource based permissions
- ex. https://graph.microsoft.com/Calendars.Read gives read permission to read user calendars in MS Graph
- App most commonly requests these permissions by specifying the scopes in requests to the Microsoft identity platform authorize endpoint
- some high-privilege permissions can be granted only through administrator consent
